[PTSBE] User guide and API reference (#4013)
NVIDIA/cuda-quantum: docs/sphinx/using/ptsbe.rst

for sampling noisy quantum circuits [Patti2025]_. It is a powerful generalization of the
trajectories methods for noisy quantum systems that stochastically samples
noise operators from a noisy quantum circuit and then subsequently builds
and samples from the corresponding pseudo-coherent quantum states rather than sampling from
the full density matrix of a system, as this is quadratically larger than
each pseudo-coherent quantum statevector [Carmichael2007]_. While these trajectory methods
can be much more efficient than constructing and sampling from full density
matrices, they traditionally sampled only one shot per constructed state.
In contrast, PTSBE *pre-samples* a set of noise
realizations (trajectories) from the circuit's noise model and then *batches*
circuit executions by unique trajectory [Patti2025]_. As the noise pre-sampling and state post-sampling
are tasks with only low-degree polynomial complexity, while the state construction
is, in general, of exponential complexity, PTSBE allows us to gather noisy quantum data
orders of magnitude quicker than traditional trajectory sampling methods by allowing finely-tuned

> batched sampling. PTSBE can be used to capture millions of times more noisy shot data, which can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is, in general, of exponential complexity, PTSBE allows us to gather noisy quantum data
orders of magnitude quicker than traditional trajectory sampling methods by
enabling batch sampling of simulated statevectors. PTSBE can be used to capture millions of times more noisy shot data, which can
```

then be used as e.g., training data in ML tasks such as AI decoders, or it can be deployed proportionally, 

> capturing the exact statistics of the problem while still offering a considerable speedup. In particular,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then be used as e.g., synthetic training data for ML tasks such as AI decoders, or as an accelerated implementation of sampling. In particular,
```

   :header-rows: 1

   * - Phase
     - Name
     - Description
   * - 1
     - Trajectory Sampling
     - Draw *T* unique trajectories from the full noise space using a sampling
       strategy. Each trajectory specifies which Kraus operator fires at every
       noise site.
   * - 2
     - Shot Allocation
     - Distribute the total *N* shots across the *T* trajectories according to
       a shot allocation strategy (e.g. proportional to trajectory probability).
   * - 3
     - Batch Execution
     - Simulate each trajectory as a pure-state circuit. The per-trajectory
       measurement outcomes are merged into a single :class:`~cudaq.SampleResult`.

Because trajectories are reused across many shots, the number of circuit
simulations scales with the number of unique trajectories *T*, not the shot
count *N*.

When to Use PTSBE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

PTSBE is most beneficial when:

- The circuit has **few distinct noise sites** so the trajectory space is
  manageable.
- A **large shot count** is required (1 000 – 1 000 000+) so the reuse of
  trajectories provides a significant speed-up.
- The shots are intended for a data-hungry downstream task that is not necessarily

>   inhibited by correlated sampling, such as training AI models

Author: Addressed in [1b537a2](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-quantum/pull/4013/commits/1b537a25f2593afb16b62f4b246fa4acb883cc77).

   * - **Low-weight bias**
     - Biases more shots toward trajectories with fewer errors (lower Kraus
       weight). Useful when low-error events dominate the observable of
       interest.
   * - **High-weight bias**
     - Biases more shots toward high-error trajectories. Useful for studying
       rare error events.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code-block:: python

      from cudaq.ptsbe import ShotAllocationStrategy

      result = ptsbe.sample(
          bell,
          shots_count=10_000,
          noise_model=noise,
          shot_allocation=ShotAllocationStrategy(
              ShotAllocationStrategy.Type.LOW_WEIGHT_BIAS,
              bias_strength=2.0,
          ),
      )

.. tab:: C++

   .. code-block:: cpp

      #include "cudaq/ptsbe/ShotAllocationStrategy.h"

      cudaq::ptsbe::sample_options opts;
      opts.ptsbe.shot_allocation = cudaq::ptsbe::ShotAllocationStrategy(
          cudaq::ptsbe::ShotAllocationStrategy::Type::LOW_WEIGHT_BIAS,
          /*bias=*/2.0);

Inspecting Execution Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Set ``return_execution_data=True`` to attach the full execution trace —
circuit instructions, sampled trajectories, and per-trajectory counts — to

> the result:

Author: Addressed in [1b537a2](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-quantum/pull/4013/commits/1b537a25f2593afb16b62f4b246fa4acb883cc77).

      future = ptsbe.sample_async(bell, shots_count=10_000, noise_model=noise)
      # ... do other work ...
      result = future.get()

.. tab:: C++

   .. code-block:: cpp

      auto future = cudaq::ptsbe::sample_async(opts, bell);
      // ... do other work ...
      auto result = future.get();

Trajectory vs Shot Trade-offs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The central tension in PTSBE is between **trajectory count** *T* and
**shots per trajectory** *N/T*.

.. rubric:: Increasing trajectories

- Covers more of the noise space → lower bias in the estimated distribution.
- Each trajectory is simulated independently → linear scaling in simulation
  cost.
- Diminishing returns once *T* approaches the total trajectory space size.

.. rubric:: Decreasing trajectories (fewer, reused more)

- Each trajectory accumulates more shots → lower shot-noise variance for that
  trajectory.
- Fewer circuit simulations → lower wall-clock time.
- Risk of bias if high-probability regions of the noise space are under-sampled.

.. rubric:: Practical guidance

.. list-table::
   :widths: 40 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Scenario
     - Recommendation
   * - Few noise sites, low error rates

>      - Use **Exhaustive** strategy; all trajectories have manageable count.

Author: Addressed in [1b537a2](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-quantum/pull/4013/commits/1b537a25f2593afb16b62f4b246fa4acb883cc77).

   * - Many noise sites, high error rates
     - Use **Probabilistic** with ``max_trajectories`` ≈ √N; the proportional

>        shot allocation handles variance automatically.

Author: Addressed in [1b537a2](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-quantum/pull/4013/commits/1b537a25f2593afb16b62f4b246fa4acb883cc77).

   * - Studying low-error observables
     - Use **Ordered** or **Low-weight bias** to concentrate shots on the most
       probable (low-error) trajectories.
   * - Studying rare error events
     - Use **High-weight bias** to allocate more shots to high-error
       trajectories.
   * - Accuracy validation
     - Compare against a standard density-matrix run. Hellinger fidelity
       *F* ≈ 1 indicates PTSBE is faithfully reproducing the full distribution.

As a rule of thumb, ``max_trajectories`` between 100 and 10 000 covers the
majority of practical use cases. Below 100, bias may dominate. Above 10 000,

> the simulation cost approaches that of a conventional density-matrix run.

Reviewer: Add a comment about it being useful to perform a warm-up run sweeping the number of trajectories to understand the convergence behaviour.

   * - ``remote-mqpu``
     - Combines ``mqpu`` with other backends for distributed execution.
   * - ``density-matrix-cpu``
     - CPU density matrix simulator. Recommended for small noisy circuits
       (< 14 qubits) and development/testing.
   * - ``qpp-cpu``
     - CPU state vector simulator. Lightweight option for small circuits
       (< 28 qubits).

Set the target before calling :func:`cudaq.ptsbe.sample`:

.. tab:: Python

   .. code-block:: python

      # Single GPU (most common for production)
      cudaq.set_target("nvidia")

      # CPU density matrix (development / small circuits)
      cudaq.set_target("density-matrix-cpu")

      # Multi-GPU for large circuits
      cudaq.set_target("nvidia", option="mgpu")

      # Tensor network for wide shallow circuits
      cudaq.set_target("tensornet")

.. tab:: C++

   .. code-block:: cpp

      // Set via CMake target or the --target flag at runtime.
      // See backend documentation for available options.

See :doc:`backends/backends` for full details on each target including precision and
qubit count limits.

Related Approaches
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> TUSQ [Dangwal2025]_ is an alternative noisy-simulation framework addressing

Reviewer: Does this add much if we don't implement? Why did we include?

       Handles thousands of qubits.
   * - ``tensornet-mps``
     - Matrix product state (approximate). Efficient for square-shaped circuits.
   * - ``density-matrix-cpu``

>      - CPU density matrix simulator. Can be used for small noisy circuits

Reviewer: I am approving but I really think this should just be removed. It makes no sense to use PTSBE with density matrix simulation.
